---
indent: false
---

# **Connecting the dots between mechanosensitive channel abundance, osmotic shock, and survival at single-cell resolution**  

Heun Jin Lee$^a$, Griffin Chure$^b$, and Rob Phillips$^{a,\ b,\ c,\ *}$

Departments of Applied Physics$^a$, Biochemistry and Molecular
Biophysics$^b$, and Division of Biology and Biological Engineering$^c$,
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California, USA

\* Send correspondence to <phillips@pboc.caltech.edu>

## ABSTRACT

Rapid changes in extracellular osmolarity are one of many insults microbial
cells face on a daily basis. To protect against such shocks,
*Escherichia coli* expresses several types of transmembrane channels
which open and close in response to changes in membrane tension. The most
abundant of these channels is the mechanosensitive channel of large
conductance (MscL). While this channel has been heavily characterized through
structural methods, electrophysiology, and theoretical models, our
understanding of its physiological role in preventing cell death by
alleviating high membrane tension remains tenuous. In this work, we examine the
contribution of MscL alone to cell survival after osmotic shock at single
cell resolution using quantitative fluorescence microscopy. We conduct these
experiments in an *E. coli* strain which is lacking all mechanosensitive
channel genes save for MscL whose expression is tuned through ribosomal
binding site modifications. We observe complete death of the population with
less than 80 channels per cell and predict that approximately 500 channels
are needed to convey upwards of 80% survival. This large
number agrees with the average MscL copy number measured in proteomic
studies, yet disagrees substantially with the estimate of 4 - 100 channels
per cell from electrophysiology. This disagreement prompts further discussion
regarding the regulation of channel activity and the degree to which other
species of mechanosensitive channels contribute to cell survival.

## IMPORTANCE
Mechanosensitive (MS) channels are transmembrane protein complexes which open
and close in response to changes in membrane tension as a result of osmotic
shock. Despite heavy biophysical characterization, the contribution of these
channels to cell survival remains largely unknown. In this work, we use
quantitative video microscopy to measure the abundance of a single species of
MS channel in single cells followed by their survival after a large osmotic
shock. We observe total death of the population with less than 80 channels
per cell and predict that approximately 500 are needed for 80% survival. This
number agrees with measurements from various proteomic studies, but disagrees
from the estimates of 4 - 100 channels per cell via electrophysiology,
suggesting there is regulation of channel activity beyond membrane tension
alone.